A thesaurus is one of the most important
repositories for word meaning and
this lecture will talk about WordNet,
one of the most important thesauri.
Thesauri or ontologies are used for
all sorts of applications.
Information extraction or
retrieval, question answering,
lots of bioinformatic applications,
machine translations.
They play a role in all sorts of places.
One of the most commonly used ones,
WordNet is a hierarchically
organized lexical database.
It's an online thesaurus, but
also it has some aspects of a dictionary.
WordNet itself is in English,
but there's lots of other languages that
are either available or under development.
And WordNet itself,
we have about over 100,000 nouns and
over 10,000 verbs, and
also adjectives and adverbs.
And for each of those we're going to have
definitions and ontological relations.
So, for example, take the word bass,
or bass, in WordNet.
We have nouns and we also have verbs.
So here's a list of nouns,
each of the senses, and adjectives.
So we have one, two,
three, four, five, six,
seven, eight senses of bass or
bass in WordNet.
Sea bass or freshwater bass,
bass voice or basso, and so on.
And in WordNet a sense is defined by
what's called a synset or synonym set,
that is the set of near-synonyms similar
words that instantiate a sense or
a concept and also we have a gloss.
So for example, take chump as a noun,
we have the gloss,
a person who is gullible and
easy to take advantage of.
And this sense of chump
is shared by nine words.
So we have chump one and fool two so
the second sense of fool and
the ninth sense of the word mark.
And the first sense of
the word fall guy and so on.
So each of these senses
has the same gloss,
now it's not every sense of those words,
so
for example, gull has another sense,
sense two which is a kind of aquatic bird.
So, a synset is a set of
near synonyms meaning
particular senses of words that
all have a similar meaning.
Now here's the WordNet
hypernym hierarchy for bass,
this is one sense of base, an adult
male singer with the lowest voice.
And you see that a bass is a kind of
singer, which is a kind of musician,
which is a kind of performer,
a kind of person,
a kind of organism, all the way
up to physical entity and entity.
So with the hypernym hierarchy
goes all they way to the top.
Now WordNet has a lot of relations.
We've talked about relations before,
so we have hypernyms and hyponyms.
But WordNet also has
relationships like member.
So, the relation has-member so for
example a group like faculty
has members like professors.
It has instances,
we talked about instances, so
the relationship between composers in
general and the one composer, Bach.
Or, the one composer
Johann Sebastien Bach,
of course there's more than one Bach.
And then we have meronyms and holonyms, so
part-whole relationships between
individuals, so a table has a part,
which is a leg, and a course has
a part which is a meal and so on.
So those are the relationships
between parts and whole.
So lots of these relationships occur
in WordNet and antonomy as well.
Now you can look on the web for WordNet.
Now here it is.
So we can look for the word bass or bass.
And sure enough there it is,
there is our census of bass and
we can click on one of them.
Let's click on one of the fish.
There we go and now we can ask for
the whole set of inherited hypernyms.
And there's a bass is a kind of freshwater
fish, a kind of seafood, a kind of food,
all the way up, again, all the way up
to down here To entity at the bottom.
So here's the whole hypernym or
subordinate hierarchy.
Now there are standard libraries for
accessing WordNet.
There are Python libraries and
there are Java libraries and
we've given you some pointers here.
Another important thesaurus or
anthology is MeSH,
the Medical Subject Headings thesaurus
from the National Library of Medicine.
So this has almost a couple
hundred thousand entries
corresponding to a lot of headings.
So here's one, hemoglobin.
It has a set of what
are called entry terms.
Hemoglobin, Ferrous Hemoglobin.
And I don't even know how
to pronounce that word.
And these are the syns that
corresponds to the synsets in WordNet.
This is the set of synonyms for
defining hemoglobins.
And then we have a gloss as well.
So here's the MeSH hierarchy here,
the top 16 top level categories.
So we might want to look
inside one of them.
Let's say chemicals and drugs, and
inside those,
we might want to look inside amino acids.
And if we do that, we can look inside
proteins, and there's hemoglobins.
So, there's the hierarchy for MeSH.
And this ontology is used
to provide synonyms or
what are called entry terms
in the MeSH terminology.
Provide hypernyms from the hierarchy
just like WordNet and MeSH is used for
indexing journal articles in
the National Library of Medicines,
Bibliographic Database, MEDLINE PubMed
where there's 20 million journal articles,
where the articles are hand-assigned 10 or
20 MeSH terms, so I'll use full ontology.
So we've seen WordNet and MeSH,
two very commonly used thesauri or
ontologies, an important place to get
representations of word meaning and
word relations like hyponomy and synonomy.